# Project Datawarehouse

## Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project description

In this project, you'll apply concept and tenchnology of data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

## Project Datasets
You'll be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json


## Database schema design


Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis is created. This includes the following tables.

#### Staging Tables
- staging_events
- staging_songs

####  Fact Table
- songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong - 
*songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*

#### Dimension Tables
- users - users in the app - 
*user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*
- songs - songs in music database - 
*song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*
- artists - artists in music database - 
*artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude*
- time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units - 
*start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekdays



## Project Template

The project template includes six files:<br/>

sql_queries.py: In this python script you will create queries for staging, fact and dimensions tables.<br/>
cluster.ipynb: This is a jupyter notebook which creates and deletes a refshift cluster.<br/>
create_table.py: This script creates the fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift cluster.<br/>
etl.py: This script loads and processes data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift.<br/>
requirements.txt: Python dependencies needed to run the project on your local machine.<br/>
README.md This is the current file which provides detailed description of the project.<br/>

#### Project Steps
Below are steps you can follow to complete each component of this project.<br/>

##### Create Table Schemas
Design schemas for your fact and dimension tables. <br/>
Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py. <br/>
Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables. <br/>
Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. This way, you can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.<br/>
Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.<br/>
Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.<br/>
Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.<br/>
##### Build ETL Pipeline
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.<br/>
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.<br/>
Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare your results with the expected results.<br/>
Delete your redshift cluster when finished.<br/>

Note
The SERIAL command in Postgres is not supported in Redshift. The equivalent in redshift is IDENTITY(0,1), which you can read more on in the Redshift Create Table Docs.<br/>


REMINDER: Do not include your AWS access keys in your code when sharing this project!

## Running the python scripts

1. To run the program, you will need to fill the following information, and save it as *dwh.cfg* in the project root folder.

```
[CLUSTER]
HOST=''
DB_NAME=''
DB_USER=''
DB_PASSWORD=''
DB_PORT=5439

[IAM_ROLE]
ARN=

[S3]
LOG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/log_data'
LOG_JSONPATH='s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json'
SONG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/song_data'

[AWS]
KEY=
SECRET=

[DWH]
DWH_CLUSTER_TYPE       = multi-node
DWH_NUM_NODES          = 4
DWH_NODE_TYPE          = dc2.large
DWH_CLUSTER_IDENTIFIER = 
DWH_DB                 = 
DWH_DB_USER            = 
DWH_DB_PASSWORD        = 
DWH_PORT               = 5439
DWH_IAM_ROLE_NAME      = 
```

2. Create a python environment with the dependencies listed on *requirements.txt*
3. Run the *cluster.py* script to create a redshift cluster on AWS.

    `$ python cluster.py`

4. Run the *create_tables* script to set up the database staging and analytical tables.

    `$ python create_tables.py`

5. Run the *etl* script to extract data from the files in S3, stage it in redshift, and store it in the dimensional tables.

    `$ python etl.py`




